Latin to GCSE sticks closely to GCSE requirements, in the belief that timetable allocation for the subject in most schools makes multi-volume courses unwieldy. For the same reason, the focus is firmly on language: some background is provided, but less paralinguistic material than in other courses. Everything is explained, in the belief that candid treatment and clear description of grammar make for greater student confidence and a better overall experience. Reading passages involve only grammar already met, and their vocabulary likewise is either already familiar or is glossed. Nothing is left to osmosis, inference or guesswork. For this reason the book is also suitable for those working independently without a teacher.  

Each chapter begins with new grammar (with plentiful examples), followed by manipulation exercises and Latin-English sentences. Continuous passages are provided from the earliest opportunity, and are kept to manageable length throughout. Passages adapted from ancient authors or based on iconic myths and historical events (from the origins of Rome to the early Empire) are preferred to invented stories about daily life.  

English-Latin exercises are also provided throughout. These soon move beyond what is required for the very simple sentences now an option at GCSE (separate provision for which is made in both volumes). They are labelled ‘S&C’ (stretch and challenge) and can be omitted, though it is hoped that students will attempt at least some of them, as a valuable way to consolidate understanding.  

Each chapter ends with a summary of the grammar covered, and a list of vocabulary met (typically about 45 words). These lists cumulatively amount to the 450 words of the OCR Defined Vocabulary. Within a chapter, GCSE words are underlined and glossed in blue when they first occur. There is a steady gradient both in the experience of grammar and in the acquisition of vocabulary.  

Part 1 begins with some general description of the Latin language, and the principle of inflection. Chapter 1 covers the present tenses of porto and sum, and the nominative and accusative of first and second declension nouns. Chapter 2 has passages and background about the Trojan War, and introduces the remaining conjugations and cases. In Chapter 3 the focus is on the journey of Aeneas from Troy. New grammar includes the imperfect tense, possum, 2-1-2 adjectives, and the imperative. Chapter 4 continues the story of Aeneas, in Sicily and in Carthage, and brings in the perfect tense, third declension nouns, and personal pronouns. Chapter 5 brings Aeneas to the site of future Rome, and moves on to the story of Romulus and Remus. The future tense is introduced, along with third declension adjectives and more pronouns. Chapter 6 covers the early kings of Rome, and the birth of the Republic. Grammar coverage includes the pluperfect tense, relative clauses and the use of quod, quamquam, ubi and postquam, eo, and compound verbs. Thus by the end of Part 1 (which is self-contained, with its own reference section) students have met the main declensions and conjugations, and all the active tenses needed for GCSE. The learning vocabularies amount to 275 of the GCSE words.  

The longer Part 2 begins in Chapter 7 with demonstrative pronouns, comparison of adjectives and adverbs, the passive (present, imperfect and future), and participles (present active and perfect passive). Passages and background cover the early days of the Republic and the development of social conflict. Chapter 8 brings in the perfect and pluperfect passive, simple conditional clauses, ipse and idem, the ablative absolute, and some irregular verbs. Reading material covers the expansion of Roman power in Italy, and the Gallic invasion. Chapter 9 introduces deponent and semi-deponent verbs, indirect statement, and some less common pronouns. The narrative focus here is Hannibal and his journey over the Alps to invade Italy. Chapter 10 deals with the imperfect subjunctive, purpose clauses, fourth and fifth declension nouns, indirect commands, result clauses, verbs of fearing,the pluperfect subjunctive, cum clauses, indirect questions, the connecting relative, and the gerundive. Background and passages deal with the career, achievements and assassination of Julius Caesar. Coverage of GCSE grammar and vocabulary is by this point complete.  

Chapter 11 provides GCSE-level reading practice, with 20 revision passages about the Julio-Claudian emperors. Chapter 12 has 400 revision sentences (in sets of ten, each on a particular construction or grammar point). These are followed by details of the restricted grammar and vocabulary for GCSE English-Latin sentences, and ten exercises for these, then five complete practice GCSE Language papers. There is a comprehensive reference grammar covering the whole course, its layout aiming at maximum clarity and concentration on essentials. Six appendices summarise (1) use of cases, (2) constructions, (3) negatives, (4) uses of the subjunctive, (5) words easily confused, and (6) words with more than one meaning. Finally there is a glossary of grammar terms, English-Latin vocabulary, Latin-English vocabulary with grammar details, and an index.  
